just a reminder that like we're going to
talk about dopamine detox today
a lot of the things that people struggle
with and when people have questions like
how do i build confidence how do i you
know
let go of past resentment how do i
better understand anxiety like how can i
develop like a meditation program to
help me with like
feelings of depression or inadequacy all
of those questions so what we actually
did is take like the most
prominent questions in our community and
actually package them together
in a really formal way and that's what
dr k's guides are
so if you guys have um you know
particular
issues where like you're watching stream
and one day you're like oh my god like
that's me i feel personally attacked sag
like oh what do i do about that that's
what the guides are there for i think
they really cover like 70
of the introductory questions that
people will have
um so you guys can you know check those
out they should be coming out in about
a month or two so what we're going to do
is we're just going to start
with googling dopamine detox
this is gonna explain part of the reason
why dopamine detox is tough so recently
i heard about this whole dopamine detox
idea
usually when i hear about these trends
or whatever i ignore them but this time
it was different not only did i become
more productive but i also quit smoking
wow
that's really impressive so what is a
dopamine detox
so like what is dopamine great so he
says that it is
a type of neurotransmitter okay
this shows a picture of it good detox is
a process where you move something toxic
or unhealthy out of your body
this is also called detoxification
this is where things get weird right
because in the dopamine detox are we
removing
dopamine from our body so however
dopamine what makes dopamine so bad is
that it
is is that your brain keeps looking for
it over what you actually want so this
is where we get into a problem
so we're going to dig into the
neuroscience here this is the statement
is untrue
so dopamine is what determines
what you want so if we look at like what
dopamine does in the brain it actually
determines your it the dopamine reward
circuitry
is a circuit of motivation and behavior
so like
when you want something that is because
of dopamine so what does a dopamine d
a dopamine detox removes almost all
dopamine from your body
for how for however you choose to do it
so this statement is so horribly
incorrect that it blows my mind
okay so this is like saying going on a
diet is removing
almost all calories from your body for
however long you do it
okay the goal of a dopamine detox and
this is a this is a really important
point which will illustrate down the
road
is not to remove dopamine at all we're
not trying to remove dopamine dopamine
is a neurotransmitter i don't know if
you guys know this but like
parkinson's disease is
the result of destruction of your
dopaminergic neurons
in a particular part of your brain and
so like if we removed all the dopamine
from
our body what we would end up with is
parkinson's disease
this is not true we do not want to
remove the dopamine levels
my point here is that people who are
spreading this information do not have
so this was like on the front page so i
granted i used
go i don't know exactly what would
happen if i use google probably be
influenced by my search history
so i use duckduckgo in in you know in
privacy mode
and so like the first thing that i want
y'all to understand about dopamine detox
is
like most of the information out there
is like done
sure like this person had a personal
experience and i think it's great that
they're sharing that personal experience
but like they don't understand actually
like what the goal is
okay so then let's see what they say
next okay so step one so how do
you just remove it all yourself you just
ah
one of my favorites from things of the
internet that involves self-help and
growth
growth blogs you just remove it just
remove it chat
what's wrong what's wrong with you
dumbasses
just remove it just just log out
just like food none just don't eat chat
anything else that gives you dopamine
stop eating
log out of all your devices just stop
playing video games chat just stop
drinking just stop doing drugs just
cigarettes oh like no wonder he quit
smoking he was like oh my god
you just get rid of it chat for how long
do you do a dopamine detox most people
said
for 24 hours however there were some
people like alex becker who did it for
much longer oh alex becker did it for
march so i decided to go for 36.
wow that's so horribly incorrect because
this does not
understa like this person does not
understand the mechanisms through which
a dopamine detox works we'll get to this
okay
where i failed will i do it again what i
don't understand
most of it chat most of it wow for a
fail
so i don't even know let's just move on
to the next one okay all right
so how to reset your mind with a
dopamine detox
from project life mastery okay is there
some stuff about world health
organization
okay there's a how to reset your mind
dopamine detox youtube video
this guy is smiling and is wearing a
suit cool
ready to succeed faster and master every
area of your life
click here to join my life master
accelerator mastery
life mastery accelerator program
a dopamine detox can change your life
okay let's look at the neuroscience
dopamine functions in the
neurotransmitter that is correct
it affects many aspects of your behavior
some of which include learning
motivation mood
this is also correct so this this
neuroscience seems better chat your
brain is addicted to dopamine and it
will try to stimulate
the repetition of behavior that produce
dopamine in the first place technically
released
dopamine in the first place not produced
it but close enough right we can let
that slide
once you get what you desire dopamine
turns off as a result you end up feeling
not as satisfied as you thought you
would
sort of okay you may end up feeling
empty okay
okay he talks about phenol ethyl amines
here
falling in love i'm not quite sure
what this has to do a simple and
powerful example is sugar addiction
dopamine creates a craving for sugar
so he talks a little bit about
satisfaction which makes sense so this
is actually like this is pretty good
oh wow look discover the seven proven
business models that made me an internet
millionaire in less than three years
and he's sitting on a car get
instant access to free video training
and get started
free four-part video training and he's
sitting on a b discover how to make
money publishing books on amazon
mastermind your way towards success
i'm con hmm
okay let's go back to this i'm getting
i'm getting a little bit distracted by
you know i guess this guy is an expert
at amazon
publishing or dopamine
i'm confused investing for beginners
supplements
how to master your mind and emotions how
to start an amazon fba physical products
business
she makes 40 000 per month on amazon and
up nlp training
what it's really like to be a
millionaire okay i'm a little bit
confused about what this guy's
okay so here's where things can get
messy when you stop engaging in
addictive behaviors all at once you may
experience withdrawal
symptoms this is a dangerous way to
detox your system this is also true so
withdrawal from alcohol and
benzodiazepines can even be
life-threatening
it becomes the only way that you are
able to experience happiness please use
dopamine
people use dopamine hits as a way to
mask negative emotions that they don't
want to feel
this is also correct you can only
distract yourself for so long before
those emotions rise to the surface and
start affecting
every area of your life sort of true
best way to reset your mind is to
cultivate here and now transmitters
these include serotonin endorphins
oxytocin and gaba
okay so this is where the neuroscience
once again is just way off
these neurotransmitters allow you to
enjoy the present moment experience
connection and be at peace with yourself
that's just
horribly incorrect so just to give you
guys an example okay so this is
neuroscience 101
neurotransmitters are like letters of
the alphabet
they can be used for all kinds of things
so for example serotonin is used in your
gi system and if you get way too much
serotonin in your gi system
if you cultivate too much of the here
and now transmitter of serotonin
you will end up with diarrhea this is
bad
gaba is a supr suppressing or
or inhibiting neurotransmitter that is
activated in
increased by the use of alcohol and
benzodiazepines
using so like alcohol literally
activates your gaba receptors
and and stimulates gaba production
so this is the one thing that i really
notice about you know people
like this dude who like i'm sure that
he's trying to help people and it seems
like you know he's got
he's actually doing a pretty good job
with the science um but it seems like
his expert
his expertise is in mastermind your way
towards success
he's an internet on entrepreneur life
and business coast
and philanthropist right so it seems
like he's not claiming to be a
neuroscientist which is great
um but like this is like so
neurotransmitters in the brain
and all over your body do all sorts of
things so oxytocin for example
is also what causes people to lactate
if they're you know in the postpartum
period
so like neurotransmitters don't just do
one thing they're actually like letters
of the alphabet so if you think about a
letter of the alphabet
it's used in a lot of different words
right maybe some letters may be more
common
in particular kinds of words but our
body like it's basically a signal
that the body sends and depending on
where the signal is sent like in in the
basal ganglia
dopamine is used for like regulating
motor stuff
right like how i move so like for
example people who have like basal
ganglia problems will have like their
their movement is not
smooth with their arms it'll be like a
ratchet movement so you cultivate these
here and now transmitters by slowly
starting to remove
behaviors that are causing issues in
your life
pick one thing in your life that you're
addicted to whether it's video games
pornography social media
coffee or sugar give your mind a rest
and allow your baseline to return just
just give your mind rest chat meditation
is a powerful way to increase your
dopamine levels naturally and reset your
brain i actually don't know if it's true
that's true i don't know if meditation
does anything to alter your dopamine
levels
it may this this could be correct it's
also been
found to rebuild your frontal cortex
this is true i don't know about rebuild
but it does improve prefrontal cortical
function
which leads to self-control and
willpower that is correct
i encourage you to do some research i
completely agree because this doesn't
seem like a whole lot of research
yes chad i encourage you to do that if
you're struggling don't give up hope
that's cool right that's a message of
positivity
are you ready to do a dopamine detox
okay so i don't know exactly what this
person is doing
but
yeah so like this is my point like so
he's you know standing in a cool
place and speaking to people and stuff i
i just don't know
so this is the problem with dopamine
detox is like no one knows like what on
earth they're talking about
like i don't get that this person is
you know he's this is great i mean this
is actually pretty similar to what we do
right chad it's like
purpose vision spirituality like
neuroscience sprinkled in like
it's kind of like us right so this dude
is like happy and he's successful and
there he is in sunglasses with a car
and oh my goodness
wow this is so this guy must know a lot
about
you know dopamine detox and then
there are
testimonials great
yeah so i just don't know
i don't know about this stuff okay so it
looks like he's got
courses affiliate marketing mastery
mastering book publishing the 24-hour
book system
amaz amazing selling machine so i i just
this is my point is like people what
what i think is going on right now when
it comes to like information
about dopamine detoxes is that like
people like this who seems like he's
good at selling stuff right
so his expertise is in selling and he's
like oh like this is great like
people will search for dopamine detox my
website will pop
up because he knows about you know
marketing stuff and then i will talk a
little bit about it and then
presumably he will people will purchase
my products and services
so this is like the problem with with a
lot of the information about dopamine
detox
is that it seems like people just sort
of like talk about it right but really
don't know what they
are talking about so now let's let's
let's
before we get too far let's look at like
so let's look at the flip side right so
if i were to go to pubmed
and do a search for dopamine detox what
would i find
right so so first of all i don't know if
you guys know this but you know if i do
you should see a bunch of papers okay
when you search things on pubmed so if i
search for
dopamine detox essentially i find
nothing so narcotic antagonists and drug
dependents
pilot studies showing enhancement
compliance with cin10 amino acid
precursors and
and keflanase inhibition therapy this is
the other problem with dopamine detox
which i want everyone to understand is
that dopamine detox has not actually
been studied
okay so there are not clinical trials on
dopamine detox
so everything that i wanted to share
with you guys today is going to be
grounded in neuroscience
it's stuff that i've done clinically but
if we really look at like have there
been randomized controlled trials on
dopamine detoxes
there have not right so there have not
been actual studies that i've been able
to find
that have a specific protocol for a
dopamine detox
and kind of like you know how to
accomplish it okay
so in a sense like while i'm being
critical of these people like if we want
to be a little bit more fair we have to
at least acknowledge that
part of the reason that these people are
giving crappy information is because
frankly good information is not out
there yet so now what i'd like to do is
share with you guys my experience of
like
um you know when i've worked with people
with dopamine detox first of all
explaining to all
how the neurotransmitters actually work
okay
um so we can still so this is where like
remember that there's like the end of
evidence-based medicine which is like
review articles when we have a bunch of
studies
but before that we tend to have clinical
interventions
so this is where we can use our good
understanding of science and we'll
present with you guys with like good
literature and stuff like that
like this is stuff that is really
grounded in a lot of science what i'm
about to explain
and then we can actually like based on
our understanding of basic neuroscience
um we can actually like elucidate okay
what's going on
in in like a dopamine tolerant brain
like what happens in the mind of someone
who's playing video games
we can even hypothesize based on what's
happening in the circuitry in the brain
what the symptoms should present as and
we'll sort of do that and then y'all
tell me
like okay actually yeah that makes sense
this is actually what i experience
and so if that's the case then we can
sort of do an intervention
which i've done and i'll explain how to
do that intervention and clinically what
i've seen
okay so let's start by understanding
what dopamine actually does in the brain
dopamine pathway so this comes from
wikipedia
okay so this is a picture of a couple of
important
dopamine pathways in the brain the ones
that we're going to be looking at
are the mesocortical and the mesolimbic
so
and then the vta is also important so
these three parts of the brain are going
to be kind of where your
dopamine reward and behavior and
motivation circuitry are
so this is important to understand about
dopamine okay so dopamine is involved
in not necessarily the the feeling of
pleasure
okay and we're gonna explain this a
little bit later and this is where a lot
of people get tripped up
dopamine is the reward is the
neurotransmitter that our brain uses
to reinforce a behavior first and
foremost
so it's not necessarily the feeling of
pleasure because as we're going to
discover
hedonics and motivation are actually two
separate
neurochemical neuro circuits okay
so hedonics is the ability to experience
pleasure
and dopamine is involved in motivation
and reward
so when we engage in a behavior that
rewards us in some way
that reinforcement is going to be via
dopamine and the two pathways we're
going to be looking at the most are the
mesocortical
pathway and especially the mesolimbic
pathway so this is where the mesolimbic
pathway is in
involved in reward related cognition
which includes incentive salience this
is huge
so wanting and enjoying are actually not
the same part of the brain okay which is
going to become important in a second
so dopamine is what makes us want stuff
the liking and pleasure
is involved in the mesolimbic pathway
but there's actually a separate circuit
that involves that more which we'll dig
into once things get complicated which
is how the brain works
sorry to say it's not like super simple
and so it also has to do with aversion
related cognition
and positive reinforcement what aversion
related cognition means
is that like basically if we avoid
things so we can reward behaviors
through
a version as well so like if i don't go
to you know if i don't ask anyone out to
prom or if i don't go to prom
i'm gonna be like more peaceful because
you know i'm scared of going to prom i'm
scared of feeling alone i'm scared of
all that stuff
so dopamine is involved in that kind of
motivational circuitry way as well it's
like the motivation of avoidance
the mesocortical pathway is a little bit
different because this involves
executive
function so what that sort of means is
that our mesocortic so our mesolimbic
pathway
this pathway here okay which goes from
the ventral tag mental area
up to i forget what this part is this is
the oh nucleus accumbens
okay so uh this pathway is really around
motivation and reward
in the mesocortical pathway so remember
our frontal cortices are the ones that
give us a sense of control and willpower
so what this means executive function is
the ability to plan out a task
over time and execute on those pieces so
if i want to find a job that involves
polishing up my resume it involves
updating my linkedin profile
if it involves like these other kinds of
things then applying to jobs responding
to emails
sending you thank you notes after
interviews all of those things are
are essentially executive function
and if we really look at it this is why
it's important if we
really look at it the key thing about
dopamine here
is that that circuit is not rewarded for
each of those steps right so the
mesocortical pathway
is the one that allows us to take
actions
without being rewarded each step of the
way so when i
update my resume like i don't get a
dopamine hit right
if i apply like update my linkedin
profile i don't get a dopamine hit
and yet our brains ability to
essentially
execute long-term tasks that are not
immediately rewarding
are governed by the mesocortical pathway
and so what we actually find is that
when people get
too like dopaminergic dopamine heavy
when their mesolimbic pathway
dominates their mesocortical pathway
what we actually wind up with is people
who
are unable to engage in action that is
not
immediately rewarding so it's sort of
like they can't do what they should and
can only do what they want
okay so like you guys let me know
whether that
sort of makes sense in terms of
something that you struggle with
because that's like this is what the
neuroscience tells us right so we can
look at
these two different functions of
executive function
and like mesolimbic what it does and we
can draw hypotheses
based on the science of what the
clinical presentation
of this messed up circuitry looks like
so the next thing that we're going to
talk a little bit about
is the anterior cingulate cortex okay so
now i'm going to explain
a couple of things to y'all the anterior
cingulate cortex
is involved in something called effort
computation
and what effort computation means is
that there's basically
any time we take an act this is the
anterior cingulate cortex
anytime we we are calculating an act or
any
time we're thinking about doing
something our mind essentially has
something called an effort calculation
so it sort of says like okay i can do
this
and get this reward this requires this
much energy for this kind of reward
or i can invest in invest in a lot of
energy for a lot of reward
or i can best invest a lot of energy for
a low reward
or i can invest very little energy for a
high reward right
so i can do something like spend 10
years becoming a doctor
which is a high effort high reward
sometimes i can even do things that my
mind will tell me like oh there's no
point in asking this person out because
they'll never say yes
so that's a high effort low reward
strategy
and then even there are things that are
low effort high reward strategies like
i'm gonna spend all my money on dogecoin
amc and gamestop right and just just
i'm just gonna you know i'm gonna spend
ten bucks and i'm gonna make ten
thousand it's
easy chat easy done okay so this the
anterior cingulate cortex is involved in
all of these effort computations
and essentially what happens um is that
when we get
impaired dopaminergic neurons in the
nucleus accumbens
right so the nucleus accumbens is in the
mesolimbic pathway
what it actually does is changes the
effect of our anterior cingulate cortex
and when it does that what we
essentially do is are unable to choose
anything except for the low reward low
effort option
so i'm gonna draw this out a little bit
okay so let's understand
what we're talking about from the top
dopamine is a diverse structure
that does all kinds of stuff in our
brain it does things like
motivation and reward executive function
and even things like movement so we
don't want to empty our brain of
dopamine that's a terrible terrible idea
means we won't be motivated to do
anything so when we look at motivation
reward this is something called the
mesolimbic pathway
and we look at executive function this
is mesocortical the limbic system
is our emotional circuit of the brain
the cortices are our frontal lobes okay
so mesocortical is planning
mesolimbic rewarding behavior
okay so sometimes there is a tension
where the mesolimbic beats the rewarding
mesocorticle
what that means is that we're going to
choose rewarding behavior
over like planning and executing tasks
over long periods of time
if we meditate what we can do is reverse
this
because we're enhancing our cortical
circuits we're going to be able to take
do planned actions more than like
immediately rewarding actions so if we
look at our frontal cortex
the frontal cortex is involved with
things like
impulse control right so i don't know if
you all remember but when we looked back
at the wikipedia thing over here
what we see is that adhd is deficient in
both of these pathways especially the
mesocortical pathway
more so than the mesolimbic pathway next
thing that we're going to talk about now
this is where things get even more
complicated the anterior
cingulate cortex so this involves effort
computation
so what this means is that sometimes
your mind is saying
oh this is not worth it and when you
alter the dopamine system here
this actually goes and messes up the
anterior cingulate cortex
and messes up your effort computation so
when you impair
dopamine the only choice that you can
make is low effort
for low reward right remember we've got
effort and then we can sort of do a two
by ten two table
reward so high effort low effort
high reward low reward and basically
when we mess up our anterior cingulate
cortex this is the only quadrant
that we can do things in we can't afford
to do anything that
involves high effort for a high reward
and so like this is where
this is going to become kind of
important because what we see in a
dopamine detox is essentially going to
be that
people sort of get stuck in this
particular pattern so like what is the
neuroscience
correlation with like what all of these
things what does this mean
how is this going to present clinically
okay what this
sort of means like this is what i look
for in people who have messed up
dopamine circuits okay
the things that you are motivated
towards
aren't fun that's a better way to put it
so this is key because essentially what
happens
our mesolimbic pathway is sort of active
but something about our reward circuitry
builds up tolerance
so it doesn't actually feel fun so this
is the other thing that happens is that
there's like remember there's this war
between the mesocortical and the
mesolimbic
so the second feature of like when your
dopamine circuits are messed up
is that you should do something
but you can't this like weird basal
mesolimbic circuit
is actually ending up being stronger
than the mesocortical circuit
which in turn means this part of your
brain that is telling you okay these are
the planned actions i need to take
i need to execute them in this way is
losing to the immediately rewarding
behavior
this is just more of a clinical
observation this isn't really borne out
in the neuroscience
but things that's that other people
are highly motivated towards are hard
for you
so this is not really borne out i don't
understand the neuroscience of this
statement but
i wish i had something for you all there
but i i just don't
so like these are the three signs of
like you needing a dopamine detox number
one
there seems to be a high degree of like
compulsion
towards a behavior that does not feel
enjoyable so if we kind of think about
that like what is going on there
right because what's happening is that
the part of your brain and this is why
it's important to understand that
dopamine is not
just a pleasure chemical because you
would think that if it was just a
pleasure chemical and you
no longer felt pleasure then you would
no longer engage in the behavior
right so like if i don't enjoy playing
video games why the hell
like if i play league of legends for 10
hours a day and i'm frustrated during
most of it
why the hell do i constantly do that
crap so
it's kind of weird right so we have to
understand that dopamine is not
a is not just a pleasure chemical
because if it was a pleasure chemical
and i was motivated towards a behavior
and that behavior wasn't fun then i
would no longer be motivated towards it
so what that means is that like we have
to understand that there are two
different circuits going on in the brain
and that like
dopamine can reinforce behaviors
without necessarily leading to enjoyment
and it's that discrepancy which i really
find people to be like
uh those are the kinds of people that
benefit from a dopamine detox
so what's happening is your mesolimbic
circuit is
active and is pushing you towards a
particular behavior
but then like your ability to experience
pleasure from it
has actually developed a sense of
tolerance what this means is that if
so like the thing about dopamine the
dopamine detox has nothing to do with
your dopamine level it has everything to
do with your dopamine receptors okay so
basically this is what happens
in my brain i have a neuron
that releases a chemical signal into
something called a synaptic cleft
and in the synaptic cleft i have on the
other side a neuron that has receptors
so what happens is i essentially like
you know i release neurotransmitter from
one
neuron and it moves over to the next
neuron and activates the signal
what happens over time is that if i
release a bunch of signal
the receiving neuron is like hey i'm
getting way too much signal
and down regulates the receiving end of
the receptor
so the way that i kind of think about
this is like imagine that i have
you know a speaker volume and then the
computer volume
if my computer volume is jacked all the
way through the roof
what i'm going to do is turn down the
speaker volume so that like
the end up like the the the sound that
the
volume of the music ends up being
pleasant right and if
my computer volume is is way down
towards the bottom what i'm going to do
is
turn up my speaker volume so that once
again i have an equilibrium of like
volume that i'm listening to so our
brain does the same thing with
neurotransmitter signals
so for those of you who use caffeine
like when you start drinking caffeine
it can like keep you up all night but as
you drink caffeine on a daily basis
you develop a chemical dependence which
means that you down
regulate your caffeine receptors in your
brain so that if you want to stay up all
night with caffeine you actually have to
end up drinking more
so this principle of physiologic
tolerance is very well understood
is the same reason that you know people
can be like you know light drinkers or
heavy like
heavy drinkers right like you can be
someone who's a lightweight or a
heavyweight when it comes to drinking
and that all has to do with your degree
of physiologic tolerance with alcohol
there are other things involved it's
just not neurochemical because your
liver is involved and stuff like that
but basically essentially the more
signal you dump into your brain
the more your brain is going to down
regulate that signal so this is the
other important thing when that person
said that you do this for 24 hours 24
hours ain't going to do crap
because the the neurophysiology of
what's
going on is receptor adapt adaptation
so receptor adaptation requires weeks to
equilibrate
so if you think about if you go off of
caffeine for 24 to 36 hours
you're not going to be detoxed off a
caffeine right like
you're just going to be miserable for 24
hours and you're not going to be totally
fine
so if you also think about alcohol
addiction so for example alcohol
addiction can take anywhere from like
five to six days for the medical you
know the medically dangerous part
and then you can even have lingering
effects of chronic alcohol use for weeks
to months
as your neurochemistry like re-adapts
and your neurons start
developing new cellular machinery and
stuff like that it gets actually quite
complicated
so what we're going to do for dopamine
detox the goal
is to fix that receptor regulation
okay so when i bombard my mind with
dopamine so now we're going to get to
things like
video games and technology so when i use
like when i when i go under reddit and i
want you guys to really pay attention to
this for a second okay when you go on to
reddit like i know i do this
when i don't even think about it right i
don't think to myself oh i'm really
going to enjoy doing this like wow i
can't wait to hop onto reddit today
it's sort of like my mind is like kind
of bored or there's some sort of like
you know gap in what i'm doing and my
mind reflexively goes to like
social media or like reddit or something
like that and i get like i click on the
meme and i get that quick hit that quick
hit that quick hit
it's not actually fun it's not like when
i'm i'm you know if i go on vacation i
don't like think to myself oh man it
would be so awesome
to spend six hours a day just like on
the internet browsing memes like you
don't look forward to it
but it still is reinforcing in some way
so you could you guys see how it's like
it's not really like a craving
it's like sort of like a neuroscientific
behaviorally reinforced
mechanism that's active and we get that
quick dopamine hit we get that quick
dopamine hit we get that quick dopamine
hit
so what we want to do through a dopamine
detox is reset
our levels because what happens is when
i play a video game for 10 hours a day
i'm getting a constant stream of
dopamine that constant stream of
dopamine is going to down regulate my
dopamine receptors
this also we don't actually hasn't been
studied so this is a clinical
observation
based on principles of neuroscience okay
and as our dopamine receptors get down
regulated we will enjoy things less
but something weird happens because the
reinforcement circuitry the behavioral
circuitry seems to stay intact and that
has something to do with probably
other neurotransmitters and things like
that that's like the endocannabinoid
system
and habit formation and stuff i'm not
going to go into that now but there's
another interesting there's a part two
to this lecture which is really fast so
essentially what happens is as i get the
constant stream of dopamine it's sort of
like if i'm drinking sipping
coffee throughout the day my brain is
gonna adapt to that level and it's gonna
down regulate my dopamine receptors
then we wind up in this situation where
now that my dopamine receptors are kind
of down regulated
other activities start to feel less
pleasurable
because if you think about the dopamine
hit from let's say
reading a book or going for a walk these
these things start to feel less
pleasurable so this is the next thing to
think about
when you need to dopamine detox is do
activities that
normal people seem to enjoy seem to like
not be very enjoyable to you
if the answer is yes then you need a
dopamine detox okay
so like just to kind of summarize like
what we're looking for for dopamine
detox is if your life has a constant
stream of dopamine and what we're
talking about is video game usage
social media usage these are the things
that kind of like bombard your brain
with dopamine
if that's the case and you wind up in
this clinical presentation
of feeling compelled or a compulsive
behavior
that does not actually lead to enjoyment
so if you play video games for 10 hours
a day
and like don't actually have fun then
you may need a dopamine detox if you
spend a bunch of time on social media
and don't even enjoy it
you may need a dopamine detox one person
is mentioning pornography
that could absolutely be a part of it
right so this is why we're not going to
be intervention specific
we're not going to be like you know
addiction specific what we're explaining
is the
neurochemistry of the dopamine reward
system and so whatever you do that
results in this presentation
makes uh dopamine detox potentially
useful for you
does that make sense like it's not about
what the addiction is it's not what
about what the behavior is it's about
the clinical signs of a particular
brain that is messed up in terms of
dopamine reward system
okay so you feel compelled to do
something but you don't
enjoy it things that other people tend
to be able to do
or be able to enjoy that you can't enjoy
you may want to consider a dopamine
detox and then the last thing is sort of
like
you're unable to control the part of
your mind that is or there's a war
between like
what you know you should do but you end
up just going towards the compulsive
behaviors over and over and over again
like that's the third sign
okay